Add OpenStack Failure Domains (#1319)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/cloud-integration/openstack/failure-domains.md

        direction TB
   
        control_plane_net_3(Control plane subnet 3)
        storage_net_3(Storage subnet 3)
 
        subgraph Nova AZ 3
            control_3(Control plane node)
        end
 
        subgraph Cinder AZ 3
            storage_3(Cinder storage)
        end
 
        control_3 -- tag: control_plane --- control_plane_net_3
        control_3 -- tag: storage --- storage_net_3
        storage_3 --- storage_net_3
    end
 
    control_plane_net_1 --- spine
    control_plane_net_2 --- spine
    control_plane_net_3 --- spine
```

## Motivation

This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this proposal. Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users.

### User Stories

* As an administrator, I want to ensure my control plane is resilient to the
  failure of a single compute availability zone.
* As an administrator, I want to ensure my control plane is resilient to the
  failure of a single storage availability zone.
* As an administrator, I want to deploy my control plane across multiple
  independent L2 networks.
* As an administrator, when I implement failure domains for an OpenStack service

>   that did not previously have them, I want to be able to automatically redeploy

Reviewer: added "in a running cluster" to clarify it's indeed a day-2 op we're talking about

We will add a `FailureDomains` field to [OpenStack MachinePool](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/dbbc890fa40bd49aa761fb03612415e964c9eaf2/pkg/types/openstack/machinepool.go#L5-L35). The semantics of this field will be identical to the semantics of the existing `Zones` field expanded to be complete failure domains. These semantics are described in the comment below. We will document `Zones` as being deprecated, but have no immediate plans to remove it.

```go
    // FailureDomains defines a set of failure domains to be used by this
    // MachinePool. For the control plane, machines will be balanced between
    // these failure domains. For workers the installer will create a seperate
    // MachineSet for each defined failure domain. If empty, failure domains
    // will not be used and a single worker MachineSet will be created.
    //
    // It is an error to define both zones and failureDomains.
    // +optional
    FailureDomains []OpenStackFailureDomain `json:"failureDomains,omitempty"`
```

> The `MachinesSubnet` option in install-config can be used to define the default subnet where to attach servers that do not have a Failure domain, or servers in Failure domains that do not specify Ports. If no `MachinesSubnet` is specified, the Installer will create a subnet and use it as the `MachinesSubnet`.

Reviewer 2: > The `MachinesSubnet` option in install-config can be used to define the default subnet where to attach servers that do not have a Failure domain, or servers in Failure domains that do not specify Ports.

So the only difference between `MachinesSubnet` and `Ports` on the failureDomains field is the fact that the Network of the Subnet on `MachinesSubnet` is not connected to any specific AZ, while it's connected on Ports? Plus ensuring all nodes have the same control plane subnets?

Reviewer: There are a couple syntactic differences:
* `MachinesSubnet` is only one, while `Ports` is an array
* `MachinesSubnet` is a subnet, while you can use `Ports` to define a connection to a network if you like that.

The main difference though is that while `MachinesSubnet` is a cluster-wide property, `Ports` is a property of a failure domain. Which means that machines in separate failure domains can end up attached to separate networks or subnets.

> the Network of the Subnet on MachinesSubnet is not connected to any specific AZ

In both cases (`MachinesSubnet` and whatever a port in `Ports` is connecting to), we are not dealing with zones. The network or the subnet in question must already exist, so the user (or their OSP admin) will have created them in the Neutron zone of their liking prior to launching the Installer.

Did I answer the question?

> The `MachinesSubnet` option in install-config can be used to define the default subnet where to attach servers that do not have a Failure domain, or servers in Failure domains that do not specify Ports. If no `MachinesSubnet` is specified, the Installer will create a subnet and use it as the `MachinesSubnet`.

Reviewer: Right. I find it confusing though that we have two terms to refer to the same thing:
* "default primary subnet" when it's created by the Installer
* `MachinesSubnet` when its reference is passed by the user in install-config

> The `MachinesSubnet` option in install-config can be used to define the default subnet where to attach servers that do not have a Failure domain, or servers in Failure domains that do not specify Ports. If no `MachinesSubnet` is specified, the Installer will create a subnet and use it as the `MachinesSubnet`.

Reviewer: I have rephrased; PTAL

    // the new failure domain injected.
    InjectFailureDomain(failuredomain.FailureDomain) (ProviderConfig, error)

    // ExtractFailureDomain is used to extract a failure domain from the ProviderConfig.
    ExtractFailureDomain() failuredomain.FailureDomain
```

We can always do this unambiguously because we store the entire failure domain in the ProviderSpec.

### Workflow Description

#### Create a new cluster with control plane and worker failure domains

An OpenStack cloud has 3 failure domains: az1, az2, and az3. Each of these has corresponding Nova(compute) and Cinder(storage) availability zones of the same name. Additionally each failure domain contains a pre-created provider network with a subnet.

The user wants to create a control plane with 3 nodes with each node in a different failure domain, and 6 workers distributed evenly across the same 3 failure domains.

The user creates an install config containing the following:

```yaml
platform:
  openstack:
    machinesSubnet: 31ad4088-7e52-48da-9df5-35e70da438f6
controlPlane:
  name: control-plane
  platform:
    openstack:
      type: m1.large
      rootVolume:
        size: 50
        type: gold

>       failureDomains:

Reviewer 2: Should all resources on the same failureDomain be in the same az? If not, perhaps we should mention that

Reviewer: In our proposed definition, a failure domain is a bundle of:
* zero or one Compute zones
* zero or one Storage zones
* zero or one subnets

I am adding this to the doc for clarity. Is this answering your question?

Reviewer 3: Where did that get answered, because while I see your definition, I don't think it answers Maysa's question. If the failure domain is defined as no compute zone, does that mean that the `AvailabilityZone` must be empty? (Which IIUC means OpenStack picks the AZ when you create the VM?)

      - subnetID: 31ad4088-7e52-48da-9df5-35e70da438f6
      tags:
      - "control-plane"
```

#### Upgrade an existing cluster to use control plane failure domains

This is not supported until we integrate with Control Plane MachineSet.

#### Upgrade an existing cluster to use worker failure domains

Note that there is currently little reason to do this. The only functionality we currently have for distributing workers across failure domains is in the installer, so not relevent to an existing cluster. However, the user would do this by creating a new MachineSet with a template containing the failure domain definition. e.g.:

```yaml
spec:
  ...
  replicas: 5
  template:
    ...
    spec:
      providerSpec:
        value:
          apiVersion: openstackproviderconfig.openshift.io/v1alpha1
          kind: OpenstackProviderSpec
          ...
          flavor: m1.large
          image: rhcos
          failureDomain:
            computeAvailabilityZone: az1
            ports:
            - networkID: 4a270cf8-f5f9-4a09-8cfc-d39d77aa2ba1
              fixedIPs:
              - subnetID: 31ad4088-7e52-48da-9df5-35e70da438f6
              tags:
              - "control-plane"
```

> #### Variation [optional]

Reviewer 2: Should two failureDomains also be supported?

Reviewer: No. One `MachineSet` defines a set of identical machines deployed in the same failure domain. If the user wants to spread machines across failure domains, they will have to create one `MachineSet` per failure domain.

 
        control_2 -- tag: control_plane --- control_plane_net_2
        control_2 -- tag: storage --- storage_net_2
        storage_2 --- storage_net_2
    end
 
    subgraph Failure Domain 3
        direction TB
   
        control_plane_net_3(Control plane subnet 3)
        storage_net_3(Storage subnet 3)
 
        subgraph Nova AZ 3
            control_3(Control plane node)
        end
 
        subgraph Cinder AZ 3
            storage_3(Cinder storage)
        end
 
        control_3 -- tag: control_plane --- control_plane_net_3
        control_3 -- tag: storage --- storage_net_3
        storage_3 --- storage_net_3
    end
 
    control_plane_net_1 --- spine
    control_plane_net_2 --- spine
    control_plane_net_3 --- spine
```

## Motivation

This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this proposal. Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users.

### User Stories

* As an administrator, I want to ensure my control plane is resilient to the
  failure of a single compute availability zone.
* As an administrator, I want to ensure my control plane is resilient to the
  failure of a single storage availability zone.

> * As an administrator, I want to deploy my control plane across multiple

Reviewer 3: This user story doesn't have a why, just a what, why does deploying across multiple networks help the administrator

  independent L2 networks.
* As an administrator, when I implement failure domains for an OpenStack service
  that did not previously have them, I want to be able to automatically redeploy
  my control plane in a running cluster to take advantage of them.
* As an administrator, when I modify a failure domain within my OpenStack
  deployment, I want to be able to automatically redeploy my control plane to
  take advantage of the change.
* As an administrator who does not use failure domains, I do not want to
  change any of my existing configuration or tooling due to this change.

> * As a developer of Control Plane MachineSet, I want to know unambiguously what

Reviewer 3: This should all be one word to avoid ambiguity with a `MachineSet` for the control plane
```suggestion
* As a developer of ControlPlaneMachineSet, I want to know unambiguously what
```

  failure domain specification was used for a given Machine so I can ensure the
  Machine is redeployed if required.
* As a developer in the Shift on Stack team, I want to ensure that the OpenShift
  definition of OpenStack failure domains is consistent with the

>   cluster-api-provider-openstack definition of OpenStack failure domains.

Reviewer 3: What does consistent mean? You don't need it to be identical, provided it can be converted, so do you mean identical, or convertible?

### Goals

> * Define a unified failure domain specification for use by machines.

Reviewer 3: Which user story does a unified failure domain spec relate to?

> * Integrate this into the installer.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps provide a more specific statement in place of this, "this" tends to be wooly
```suggestion
* Allow installation of OpenShift on OpenStack with failure domains as a day-0 operation
```

> * Ensure this can be integrated into Control Plane MachineSet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Ensure OpenStack FailureDomains can be integrated into ControlPlaneMachineSet.
```

### Non-Goals

> * Integration with Control Plane MachineSet.

Reviewer 3: Does this not conflict with the last goal?

## Proposal

In our proposed definition, a failure domain is a bundle of:

> * zero or one Compute zones

Reviewer 4: Is there a reason why we want to have a max of 1 compute or storage zones is fd?  What will happen if you specify one or two of those three types of zones/port, and leave blank the others?

properties which together ensure the Machine is deployed to a specific,
consistent failure domain. These properties will be merged into the Machine
definition by the machine provisioner, which may be either the installer or the
machine controller.

```go
type OpenStackFailureDomain struct {
    // ComputeAvailabilityZone is the name of a valid nova availability zone
    // +optional
    ComputeAvailabilityZone string `json:"computeAvailabilityZone,omitempty"`

    // StorageAvailabilityZone is the name of a valid cinder availability zone
    // +optional
    StorageAvailabilityZone string `json:"storageAvailabilityZone,omitempty"`

    // Ports defines a set of ports and their attached networks. These will be prepended to any another ports attached to the server.
    // +optional
    Ports []PortOpts `json:"ports,omitempty"`
}
```

This same struct will be referenced:
* In the installer's InstallConfig for the initial creation of control plane servers and the creation of relevant manifests.
* In OpenStackProviderSpec for the creation of a machine using a specific failure domain.
* In CPMS, for the managed balancing of control plane machines across failure domains.

> Leaving any of these fields as their zero value will cause it to be ignored when provisioning the machine. This means a failure domain can define any combination of these fields.

Reviewer 3: So if I had two machines, which had providerspecs that look like
```
providerSpec:
  availabilityZone: A
  failureDomain:
    storageAvailabilityZone: A
```
and
```
providerSpec:
  availabilityZone: B
  failureDomain:
    storageAvailabilityZone: A
```
Would you consider these as the same failure domain? If you do, then we cannot use these failure domains within CPMS, since you are varying something outside of your definition of a failure domain.
A failure domain in CPMS must capture all fields that may be different between individual machines in the management of the CPMS.

It strikes me, that if we add this failure domain struct, with the proposed fields, that every other field must be identical outside of the failure domain, so, availability zone and storage availability zone must be the zero value if failure domain is present, right?

In which case, why duplicate those fields into the failure domains struct?

> `ComputeAvailabilityZone` will set the Nova availability zone of the created server. It will be an error to specify [`AvailabilityZone`](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/54592eea55395af31e82fa9a605eb45523115454/machine/v1alpha1/types_openstack.go#L67-L69) on a Machine with a failure domain that specifies `ComputeAvailabilityZone`.

Reviewer 3: I think it should be an error if `AvailabilityZone` is set when `FailureDomain` is set

> `StorageAvailabilityZone` will set the Cinder availability zone of any volume attached during initial machine creation. This is currently limited to a root volume, but may be extended to include additional volumes in the future. It will be an error to specify [`Zone`](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/54592eea55395af31e82fa9a605eb45523115454/machine/v1alpha1/types_openstack.go#L358-L360) on a volume attached to a Machine with a failure domain that specifies `StorageAvailabilityZone`.

Reviewer 3: I think it should be an error if `Zone` is set when `FailureDomain` is set

> `Ports` will be used to define a set of port to be attached to all Machines in a failure domain. They use the existing [`PortOpts`](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/54592eea55395af31e82fa9a605eb45523115454/machine/v1alpha1/types_openstack.go#L283-L333) struct to define ports with all currently supported properties and attachments with the same semantics. Note specifically that the network or subnet a port will attach to must already exist. Unlike `ComputeAvailabilityZone` and `StorageAvailabilityZone` it will be allowed to specify this field on both the failure domain and the Machine. If both are defined they will be merged by putting the failure domain ports first.

Reviewer 3: Since we know `PortOpts` is problematic, why not introduce this new field with a `PortOptsNew` which has a better design? 

For CPMS, you will introduce a new API, the failure domain for openstack will be within the remit of the CPMS and machine v1 APIs, and so will have to go through thorough review.

It must be convertible to the existing `PortOpts`, but need not be identical. I would encourage you to think about this new failure domain ports using the same design

```

By default, the Installer creates a subnet where to attach servers that do not have a Failure domain, or servers in Failure domains that do not specify Ports. The `MachinesSubnet` option in install-config can be used to set an existing subnet as the default subnet for machines instead.

_Note that in deployments where all the servers are assigned to Failure domains, and where all these Failure domains have Ports specified, the default subnet for machines may remain empty. To prevent the Installer from creating a subnet, set `MachinesSubnet` in install-config to an existing subnet._

### OpenStackProviderSpec

OpenStackProviderSpec includes a copy of the failure domain. This means that a higher level orchestrator, e.g. the installer when creating multiple MachineSets, or CPMS when creating Machines in different failure domains, only needs to do a simple copy. The Machine controller will validate and merge the FailureDomain with the rest of the MachineSpec at server creation time.

```go
    // The OpenStackFailureDomain used to create the server.
    FailureDomains OpenStackFailureDomain `json:"failureDomains,omitempty"`
```

### Control Plane MachineSet

> The full details of integration with Control Plane MachineSet are out of scope of this enhancement. However, we must ensure this enhancement is compatible with future integration with CPMS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The full details of integration with ControlPlaneMachineSet are out of scope of this enhancement. However, we must ensure this enhancement is compatible with future integration with CPMS.
```

        ports:
        - networkID: dbc8664c-feee-4168-854b-75f8eb8eb258
          fixedIPs:
          - subnetID: c23f88c0-910a-4d4a-9ca6-9a11a0d71f40
          tags:
          - "control-plane"
      - computeAvailabilityZone: az3
        storageAvailabilityZone: az3
        ports:
        - networkID: a996c932-2aa1-4095-a40e-765bf844fcb4
          fixedIPs:
          - subnetID: 61d376b0-3714-4549-b017-3a5e0007f07c
          tags:
          - "control-plane"
  replicas: 6
```

Note that by specifying `machinesSubnet` the installer will not create a default control plane network. Any future workers created without explicit ports will be attached to this subnet.

The created Machines will contain the relevant failure domain in full in their `OpenStackProviderSpec`, e.g.:

```yaml
  ...
  flavor: m1.large
  rootVolume:
    volumeType: gold
    size: 50
  failureDomain:
    computeAvailabilityZone: az1
    storageAvailabilityZone: az1
    ports:
    - networkID: 4a270cf8-f5f9-4a09-8cfc-d39d77aa2ba1
      fixedIPs:
      - subnetID: 31ad4088-7e52-48da-9df5-35e70da438f6
      tags:
      - "control-plane"
```

#### Upgrade an existing cluster to use control plane failure domains

> This is not supported until we integrate with Control Plane MachineSet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is not supported until we integrate with ControlPlaneMachineSet.
```

    - "storage"
```

An empty failure domain is valid, but probably not very useful:

```yaml
failureDomain:
```

### API Extensions

We change 2 APIs:

* [OpenStack `MachinePool`](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/dbbc890fa40bd49aa761fb03612415e964c9eaf2/pkg/types/openstack/machinepool.go#L5-L35) as described in [the Installer section](#installer).
* [`OpenStackProviderSpec`](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/54592eea55395af31e82fa9a605eb45523115454/machine/v1alpha1/types_openstack.go#L30-L107) as described in [the `OpenStackProviderSpec` section](#openstackproviderspec).

In both cases we are strictly adding new functionality rather than modifying existing behaviour.

OpenStack `MachinePool` is referenced in both the `compute` and `controlPlane` sections of install-config with behaviour defined above.

`OpenStackProviderSpec` is not strictly directly referenced by any CRD as it is only ever embedded as a Raw value. However, being embedded in the `MachineSpec` it is effectively referenced by `Machine` and `MachineSet`. It does not modify the behaviour of any component other than `machine-api-provider-openstack` (the OpenStack machine controller) as described above.

> Integration with Control Plane MachineSet will require a modification to that API. However, while it is planned it is not yet defined.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Integration with ControlPlaneMachineSet will require a modification to that API. However, while it is planned it is not yet defined.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

We will implement this behaviour in upstream CAPO first. Critically the points of similarity will be:

> * The OpenStackFailureDomain struct will be identical in OpenShift and CAPO. To ensure the independence of the OpenShift API we will have a copy rather than a reference, but the intention will be for them to remain in lock step.

Reviewer 3: Does this make sense as a goal? OpenShift must maintain the existing APIs we have while the upstream CAPO APIs are still evolving and can make breaking changes. I would argue that as long as we can reliably convert between the v1alpha1 OpenStack provider spec and the CAPO struct, then we are compatible.

And it may be advantageous, from an OCP perspective, to not duplicate the design exactly, for example, it may confusing in the context of the existing provider spec

* CAPO will have a complete copy of the failure domain in the OpenStackMachineSpec analogous to the copy of the failure domain in OpenStackProviderSpec.

> The intention is that in CAPO the machine controller will substitute failure domain values into machine spec prior to calling the server creation function shared with MAPO. Therefore MAPO will also have to do this failure domain substitution.

Reviewer 3: Where/how are we modifying specs? If the spec is written back to the API server, could this cause confusion to any parent comparing the spec with some other desired state?

Note that the above is subject to change due to upstream review.

### Risks and Mitigations

None yet.

### Drawbacks

Keeping copies of failure domains everywhere is safe, but clunky. In particular, having copies of failure domains in both compute and control-plane in install-config is not ergonomic.

> The implementation of this feature in CAPI is problematic because failure domains are referenced by name and mutable. This presents a problem with MachineDeployment if the referenced failure domain is updated because there is no API change which MachineDeployment will notice. The same is true of Machines deployed in the control plane. The risk is that fixing this in CAPI may result in a significantly different API for failure domains which we may have to adapt to in order to continue reusing code. The risk of this is probably low.

Reviewer 3: This sounds like an important thing to resolve, or at least, have a rough plan of how to resolve, before we continue here

        ports:
        - networkID: a996c932-2aa1-4095-a40e-765bf844fcb4
          fixedIPs:
          - subnetID: 61d376b0-3714-4549-b017-3a5e0007f07c
          tags:
          - "control-plane"
  replicas: 3
compute:
- name: worker
  platform:
    openstack:
      type: m1.large
      rootVolume:
        size: 50
        type: silver
      failureDomains:
      - computeAvailabilityZone: az1
        storageAvailabilityZone: az1
        ports:
        - networkID: 4a270cf8-f5f9-4a09-8cfc-d39d77aa2ba1
          fixedIPs:
          - subnetID: 31ad4088-7e52-48da-9df5-35e70da438f6
          tags:
          - "control-plane"
      - computeAvailabilityZone: az2
        storageAvailabilityZone: az2
        ports:
        - networkID: dbc8664c-feee-4168-854b-75f8eb8eb258
          fixedIPs:
          - subnetID: c23f88c0-910a-4d4a-9ca6-9a11a0d71f40
          tags:
          - "control-plane"
      - computeAvailabilityZone: az3
        storageAvailabilityZone: az3
        ports:
        - networkID: a996c932-2aa1-4095-a40e-765bf844fcb4
          fixedIPs:
          - subnetID: 61d376b0-3714-4549-b017-3a5e0007f07c
          tags:
          - "control-plane"
  replicas: 6

> ```

Reviewer 5: one thing that is not covered (yet) in this enhancement, could you please clarify whether we'll keep `machinesSubnet`? I think there is an opportunity to get rid of it, and maybe unify BYON use-case with how we'll do Failure Domains.

Of course `machinesSubnet` can't be removed for backward compatibility but underneath we could create a default failure domain that will use ports from this subnet.

Reviewer 5: See https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/6797 where we try to add `machinesSubnets`, whereas with FailureDomains, we could do something like:

```yaml
failureDomain:
  ports:
  - networkID: <Dual stack network ID>
    fixedIPs:
    - subnetID: <IPv4 subnet ID>
    - subnetID: <IPv6 subnet ID>
    tags:
    - "control-plane"
```

Reviewer 5: To me, both `machinesSubnet` & FailureDomains help with BYON, but FailureDomains brings deeps evolution as it's described here, so I think it's worth discussing it.

Reviewer: I tried to explain here: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1319/files#diff-f27af7058fddb21715977065ad74f5ad53b668cbcf00c8cc971b12b1e9bf991fR219-R221

Can you help me make it clearer?

Also we will probably have to mention `machinesSubnets` with an S if dual-stack merges before us.

Reviewer 2: works for me as well. We continue with the machinesSubnet field
